[Music_]
>>Regina Meredith: We've
all seen the movies
and read the books where
the American or English girl
goes to Italy or Spain and falls
for the love of their lives.
It's such a common theme
that it's become a cliche,
but cliches generally
have an underlying truth.
So what is it that has
become out of balance
in our society that sends us
looking for something other
than in terms of
romantic partners?
Andre Villa would say it's
because we've lost our template
for becoming men and women.
Andrea works with youth
in helping them find
their strength and courage.
And thank you for
joining us today.
This is an interesting
conversation and one that's
uncomfortable for some people.
We tried so hard to get this
politically correct androgenous
thing going that
we've succeeded.
And there are a lot of problems
that are coming out of it.
So before we even
get into all of that,
let's talk about your own
youth, because you were raised
in Italy, you had maybe
a different template
than an American
had in the way you
were raised and coming into
your manhood as a young fellow.
And also questioning
the system that you were
plugged into, in
terms of education.
So tell us about yourself.
>> Andrea Villa: Well, I think
the most important thing that I
was blessed with, an
extended family --
>> Regina Meredith: Extended
families are huge, right.
>> Andrea Villa: Correct.
There was the grandfathers
present in my life,
especially when I
was a young kid.
And they were sort of the
custodian of the family lore
and the custodian of the
heroic struggle of my family,
with invasions, Germans
every twenty years or so,
seems they like to vacation
with their arms in Italy.
So a lot of disruption and
acts of heroism and so forth.
So I really grew up with a
real sense of where I was from.
All this story telling
around the kitchen
table, all these questions,
boys are very, very curious.
So this one element,
the other element
that was I was really
blessed, I think, was nature.
I really, you know, I was --
we wanted to spend time out.
So that allowed me to
have spent hours in,
you know, in the river,
on the river canyon,
and territory belonged to kids.
And so there was
this element, we
were not supervised
so we have to sort
of like, deal with each other.
So there was no, like,
a little league play,
where the uniform, the games,
the referees and games,
intervention of the adults.
We had to settle
and negotiate out
of the scrapes we
were getting into,
and a boy will get into scrapes.
So it was this element, and
the third element that we had,
it was nature.
And nature really I
think when you belong,
where you really develop
a sense of belonging,
and it is basically where you
get your spiritual education.
So I think those three elements,
they were very, very strong
and that is one of
the first things
that you notice when you
come to this country,
especially when you
notice that, you know,
the parents, the grandfathers
are playing golf in Florida.
And that's really
something that is a problem
>> RM: It is a problem.
As you were saying earlier,
these heroic stories
are what you and your brothers
and your cousins and everyone
were raised on, and
yet the storyteller
was the grandfather.
Tell us a little bit about how
you perceived your grandfather
at that time, how
the grandfathers were
perceived within the family.
>> AV: You know, what's
what I learned from them,
they're all mentorship,
which is another figure
that's disappearing in the
culture of this course.
Mentors really is
what is -- as a role,
it's really interesting, not so
much for you to become a doctor
or an engineer but about
you becoming a good person.
You can only become
a good person
by becoming the you
that is living there.
So a lot of time spent
with my grandfathers
is questions, you know, what
do you think about this.
He was asking questions
of me more than I
a question of him,
especially one grandfather.
So it was really like -- it
was really drawing me out with
a process of inquiries, it
wasn't telling me this is
right, this is wrong,
like my father would do.
Because my father
is more concerning,
you know, getting it straight.
Grandfathers are more
concerned with who you are.
I think this was
the gift, and it's
kind of role modelling I try
to do when I work with my kids,
you know it's not about
me telling them, dumping
on them what I know, just
drawing what is there already.
>> RM: So what has
happened in our society,
in the west and in
America in particular,
there's become this huge
disconnect , almost a --
kind of a self serving quality
when people reach the years
where they become
grandparents, which is oh,
I'm done with all of that.
I'm out of here, and the
breaking up of family.
I too see this as something
that's had a devastating effect
on all of us.
I mean, what about -- what
about the person growing older
themselves, not so
have that connection?
>> AV: There's a sense of
rootedness that you get if you
connected with your
elders that is --
there's no money that can
pay for it, you know, it's --
it really provides a
sense of rootedness,
a sense of belonging
to something.
When I'm in my hometown
I know where I come from,
I know the rocks, I
know the territory,
I know what happened
there and then.
So there is a sense
walking the street
it's different from anybody
living in this country.
And when I work
with the boys I do
try to get to an experience
of rootedness in life >> RM:
Rootedness, right
>> AV: Because that gives the
energy and the power to deal
with the complexities.
>> RM: We were talking
off camera about this,
and I'll get into this
part of the conversation,
but the whole role of boys and
girls in Italy is defined very
differently than growing up in
the United States, for example.
And I'll just use
those two countries,
we're all various, you know,
iterations of it in between.
But the subject
of the girls being
able to be in themselves
kind of joyful and flirty,
and they can take up space with
their own being, so to speak.
More in Italy, you see this in
Italy where the girls in the US
are more like this,
with eyes cast down
and there's more fear.
And when we were talking
off camera about it,
you were saying because this
knowledge passed back and forth
between the grandfather, the
grandfather to the father
and to the son and out to the
cousins is you have to behave
in a certain way and
you don't essentially --
I say molest in the Spanish
sense of the word --
these girls, you don't bother
these girls in an inappropriate
way.
So they're free to just grow up
and be beautiful young women.
>> AV: This is one of the first
things you notice when you go
-- when I went back to
-- went back to Italy,
is when I visit there that the
women look at you, and here,
it never happens,
never look at you.
Because there's the sense
that if they look at you
they're inviting you
in a conversation,
they're inviting you --
>> RM: They feel unsafe.
>> AV: Correct,
they feel unsafe.
Whereas in Italy they look
at you with appreciation.
A handsome man is walking
by, that was interesting,
and I got a look at you.
I feel safe enough, and
it doesn't mean anything.
It means, like, oh,
I acknowledge you,
acknowledge as I pass by.
And this is very -- it's very
-- jumps to your eyes the moment
you get to Italy, this sense
of women are much more safe.
Also because they're protected.
>> RM: Talk about
that for a moment,
that's part of what the
men pass on to each other.
>> AV: Absolutely.
How shall we say this, you know,
I do this work with initiation,
and I think one of
the first initiation
is going to ask the lady out,
and they have to go and shake
the hands of the father.
The father knows exactly
well what you're up to,
so he's going to make sure
that you shake hands with him
and he's going to be present.
So if anything
wrong happens, see,
when I was growing up there
was a lot of hanky panky going
on -- but no trouble, because
I know there was any trouble I
would be a dead man.
Either the father --
>> RM: The brothers would
come after you or your father.
>> AV: So that create a lot
of safety for the women,
but also makes me be very
clear I'm committed to this
relationship or not.
So you know, courtship is
another rite of passage
that's gone, passed by.
You know, it's come very
easy for the boys and girls
to get together without
really the consequences
that in the old days.
Courting ritual is a very
important part of village life.
Got to make sure the guy is
Good enough and proving himself
so he can spend
time with the girl.
It's also something that in some
society involves very complex
ritual and going to
debt in order to --
for you to afford a
relationship with a woman,
and this debt is supported
by your community
>> RM: Debt, you say?
>> AV: Yeah.
Debt, yeah.
So your community
makes sure, your family
makes sure you're supported in
doing this new adventure which
is the creation of new life.
So the old, very ritualized.
I won't say in Italy
was very ritualized,
but there was definitely an
awareness of who I'm dating
and what I'm dating is part
of a bigger conversation.
>> RM: And involves as
you say the community,
the entire family's support,
and agreement on some level.
I mean, I think
there are some people
listening who would
say, yeah, well
isn't that why people
who are in America
left Europe, for example,
so you didn't have
to be tied to these traditions.
Is there something that has been
a trade off or do you see this,
it's simply been a decline
in the social fabric?
>> AV: You know, when I
talk about it, this thing,
I'm always a pessimist, and
then when the work with the boys
or the girls I become
an optimist, you know?
When I see -- yes, it is --
I was saying that the
-- the casualty of sex,
the way the young people
approach sex is a terrible
thing.
It's a terrible thing not
from a moralistic, prudishness
on my part, but the fact that
easy sex keeps a boy a boy.
>> RM: Yes, that's a large
conversation I wanted to get
into that also is tied to
social events such as initially
the sexual revolution in the
United States and throughout
the west.
That's a big conversation.
>> AV: Yeah, it's a very
big conversation, it's --
and again, we -- we -- because
we went away from our ritual
conversation about this
human relationship, you know,
rite of passage and so forth.
There's a -- you know, in your
teens there's a Great Awakening
that happens, and for
women, it's about --
for the girls it's about love,
they really awaken to love.
And for the boy
there's an awakening
to love but there's also
an awakening to purpose
or their own gift
they're carrying.
And unfortunately,
both of these gifts
are totally ignored by
society, and they're
ignored because there's
usually no room for them.
There's no room for the
love that girls awaken to,
and there's no room for the
boys, the purpose the boys
awaken to.
Think in these terms, what
we have now is an educational
system that is not an
educational system, it's a --
is an instructional system
>> RM: Almost factory
farming of brains.
>> AV: Correct.
It's been designed by Napoleon
because he wanted to have
bureaucrats to run and empire.
So what happened is -- so you
need, like, continuing grade,
pass, grade, a progression,
so you need predictability,
uniformity, conformity, right?
But it's not about
educating everybody,
it's about opening
the brain and throwing
in instructions and
knowledge, technical knowledge
in the brains.
Just a strip mining,
somebody defining
strip mining of the brain.
What it really education
means, it means "educe",
it's a Latin word, it
literally means lead out,
which is really what my
grandfather used to do.
Lead my true self out, and
asking all these questions,
creating all these situations
for me to really experiment
and practice my -- the bigger
self that was living inside.
Because that's what
was really interesting.
So we live in this world that
so -- by the time that we --
we have this magical moment
in which really they're about
to -- ready to share their
gifts with the world,
love and purpose --
>> RM: What age group
does this start surfacing?
>> AV: 12.
12.
We -- society is
feeling unprepared,
because society in what--
now we have these tracks that
at the end that is going to make
you an engineer or a doctor,
or so forth.
There is nothing wrong with
being an engineer or a doctor,
we all need these people,
and technicians and so forth.
But it's not really how
our intelligence develops,
it's not really who we
are, it's not our nature.
What happens, you know, when
we come to this world we have
really -- we come -- our brain
is fully formed, we have --
this is called the triune
brain, which is divided in three
parts.
We have the stem which controls
our more basic, heartbeat,
the physiological thing,
sexual -- sexual reproduction,
control of domain of territory
and that kind of stuff,
which is a bit primitive.
It's called the
reptilian brain, right?
On top we have the mammalian
brain, the limbic brain which
we share with mammals,
and it's the seat
of emotions, deep emotions.
On top of that we
have the neo cortex
of the full frontal lobes.
So we come fully formed.
However, the connections between
these brains happens through
educations, happens through --
>> RM: Experience.
>> AV: Experience, yeah,
play, story telling, nature.
So in the first
phase, literally,
the brain grows this --
these neurons to connect,
to create the corrections
between one part of the brain
and the next.
So when we are just babies,
it's a basic instinct then
we go to more complex,
more complex function
with the limbic
system and so forth.
>> RM: So what's happening at
that magical age of puberty,
12, roughly?
>> AV: Correct, that's
the magic moment.
That's the magic
moment because we --
the limbic brain and the
reptilian brain are integrated.
And then we have
this -- by the way,
remember that this
happens in burst,
there is a big burst and then
the consolidation happens,
and also the destruction
of things we don't use.
So for limbic, from reptilian
to limbic, to frontal lobes.
Frontal lobes is the
seat of our thinking.
That happens when
you're 12 years old,
and it's a process that lasts
about til about your early
20's.
>> RM: And this is a very
delicate and profound process
involving all of the master
glands within the brain that
are now disconnected from all
of the things that stimulate it,
i.e, touch, sound, light,
nature, all of these things.
>> AV: Absolutely, absolutely.
That's when I was talking about
in Italy this ability to play,
be unsupervised -- crucial to
this development of internal
architecture, crucial,
absolutely crucial.
Make the mistakes, need to
negotiate out, create a place ,
games, that develop
the relationship --
>> RM: You establish
your own hierarchy based
on your personalities,
and you know,
there are those who end up at
kind of the back of the pack,
and they carry that around for
a lifetime until they can find
some way to breakthrough that.
That's a part of it,
it's a real game,
I mean, you're playing for real.
>> AV: Now they turn to
schools, everybody wins, right?
There is another pit fall on the
other end, that everybody wins,
which is not true,
it's another lie,
you know, sometimes you
win sometimes you lose.
>> RM: Also being here in this
country and looking at this
where everything is
politically correct,
you have to do everything in
a politically correct way.
As you say, everyone has
to win, the tables seem
to be evened out for everyone
so the texture and the contrast
between I can do this,
I can't do that seems
to have almost been eliminated.
How do you test your
boundaries if you
have none of these
natural factors at all,
every animal and human
has to go through?
>> AV: Absolutely.
By the age of 12, 13 years
old, which by the way
there's a sense in a
teen, boys or girl,
that they're really meant for
something special, unique.
We've now been
traumatized, that's really
the sense of the really
beginning a big adventure.
>> RM: That why they're
drawn toward the really big,
heroic kinds of stories,
whether it's, you know,
playing Dragons --
Dungeons and Dragons or that --
the teen movies with vampires
--
>> AV: Absolutely.
They are really ready -- the
image I like to use when I
think of those things, they
are on a space shuttle,
they're grounded down,
they're ready for lift off.
Their hormones are kicking
in, they're ready to go --
they know they're
ready to go somewhere.
Because the thing is this,
they know this intuitively,
it's a physiological
fact behind this,
and this is very important.
We use 2% of our neo cortex, 2%.
They know the age, they
are going for the 100%.
>> RM: Until we squash them.
>> AV: Until we squash them.
We say, hey, take this pill.
Fix the little -- you're acting
out now, take some Ritalin,
take this pill, it
will be all right.
And so what Ritalin
does, it disconnects you
from the engine,
from your passion,
from this revolve that
is happening naturally
in your body.
That's the -- the tragedy of
modern psychology for kids.
I mean, there are great
psychologists out there,
I know.
But that's -- we medicate
our great transformation
because nature really
design us for this,
we're really designed
for the big jump.
>> RM: Yes.
But it can be -- it can
seemingly be out of control,
out of the parents' control,
the school's control, chaotic --
>> AV: Absolutely, absolutely.
And it is, it is.
Because they're
bringing the gift,
they're bringing something
bigger than them, two tracks,
static, first grade,
second grade, you know,
intelligence is
bigger than that --
>> RM: Sports,
ballet, and so forth.
>> AV: Intelligence is
much bigger than this.
The two tracks -- tracks
are very good for survival,
you know, very good to produce
stuff, it's absolutely great,
there's nothing
better than this.
But it's not good for
human development,
we don't develop like this.
We develop in leaps, bounds,
two plus two, two steps forward,
one step backwards.
That's how we do it, sideways.
We can't box the
human experience.
So what happens is you're in
the space shuttle ready to go,
you know you're meant to go
somewhere, they are right,
we are wrong, so they're
ready to go somewhere
and nothing happens.
So here is the Ritalin and they
start medicating themselves.
And then there's binge drinking.
>> RM: It's tragic.
>> AV: Yes, of
course it's tragic.
It's absolutely a tragedy.
>> RM: Well then kids have to
find another way to deal with
that energy that
has been squashed.
I mean, it's going to come
out one way or another
unless you've drugged
them to the extent where
they can't express any more.
>> AV: And they start heroic
journeys by themselves and they
share into these gangs or
into these risk behaviors
and so forth because there's
an element of, you know,
they belong to themselves,
once they share themselves they
belong to the tragic.
>> RM: I was having a
conversation just yesterday,
another interviewee of ours,
and we were talking about
the prison system, and it
was an extended conversation,
and he said if there were
a way to embrace the people
in our prison systems, give them
some pride in themselves back,
these people often have
very high levels of courage.
Whatever it took to break free
and express themselves even
in a criminal, harmful
way, very harmful at times,
but also a certain
element of creativity.
A lot of criminals -- they know
how to find their way through
the back alleys of life.
You're saying the unhealthy
result of squashing those
normal instincts for a boy
to just burst forward --
and girls, boys and
girls -- we're talking --
you mostly work with boys so
for now let's speak about them.
>> AV: There's a subtle
moment that doesn't happen.
In the old days, and then
we have all these problems
because, you know,
they have defiance,
they call it defiance disorder,
it makes me absolutely half.
>> RM: Defiance disorder.
>> AV: When you
live with this --
when you live in terms of
defiance it's hell, right?
But you have to
understand that this
is the right place, the
right time, just as a father,
as a mother, you're exhausted.
You'll always be the
father and the mother,
but you've exhausted your roles.
The person now is ready
for the next step,
and the next step that
is covered, the next step
happens to ritual, it's
a ritual experience.
Not something that's logic, not
something that can be taught,
no teaching, it's an experience
the person has to undergo.
And then to reveal
something about themselves.
So it's that -- so up to now
it's been [INAUDIBLE] about
as bad as intellect, right?
We've been in track,
first grade, second grade.
Now we're going back to a
natural way of learning,
we're going to an experience,
an experience of a bigger self
than you get inside.
This is what -- and only this,
but it's a challenge also
to express this
gift in the world.
Because it's not enough to go as
nice as we can to the retreat,
have this beautiful
moment of life.
Then the most
important thing is I
want to see this gift
implemented in the world,
I want you to show
up in the world.
Because as you see one
of the biggest moments,
you know, to be
seen, to belong, is
one of the most
greatest human needs.
But they do come
at the forefront
when you're a teenager.
In fact, you know, they -- they
always belong to each other,
they always dress the same,
they're all individuals,
but they have --
>> RM: They have a great
need for acceptance among
themselves, yes.
>> AV: When I was 14 you
couldn't separate me.
I had this military
jacket, and I couldn't --
I was sleeping in it.
>> RM: My girlfriends and
I would call each other up
in the morning, what color
skirt are you wearing today,
are you going to wear your
little white skirts, yeah,
let's wear white today -- yeah.
>> AV: Because -- by
the way, this is like --
adolescence and teens,
it's a modern invention,
this didn't exist.
>> RM: What didn't exist?
>> AV: Up to 200 years
ago, it didn't exist.
>> RM: What didn't?
>> AV: Adolescence.
Either you're a boy --
>> RM: Adolescence --
>> AV: Adolescence, yes,
I'm sorry, I apologize --
>> RM: I'll just say it for
you, if your accent -- yeah --
>> AV: So adolescence didn't
exist because we created this
holding tank which is called
school, then you know,
they spend all these years
that they usually spend with
their fathers learning a trade
or going for some adventures
somewhere in the world,
exploring -- anyway,
learning without a man, and it
was showing really the mettle
of who they were by
being with the men,
and they try and aspire to
be with men -- or women,
but they really try to be
recognized and seen and belong
to the group of men.
>> RM: And they took
responsibility at an earlier
age.
>> AV: Absolutely.
And then what happens
now is the holding tank
is the desire to be seen, to
show really the true colors
and to see them in themselves,
to be revealed to them.
But it doesn't happen because
they're sitting in school.
>> RM: It's interesting, because
there is a school in Russia
right now that is -- it's
associated with the concepts
put forth in the Anastasia
Ringing Cedars series,
and I asked you off camera if
you were familiar with this --
yeah, and in this particular
school people are learning it
this way.
The children come because they
choose to, boys and girls.
And they are put into
very saturated curriculum
based on their own desire,
propensities, needs,
what they're curious about, and
they learn everything they can,
all different ages together.
And they mentor and
teach each other.
It might be the
12 year old that's
really getting the
advanced mathematics
and they turn out
to be the leader
of that particular group.
But they learn in
a saturated way,
things that are not only
educational but very useful
for their own lives.
They learn -- the boys
learn how to build things,
the girls can learn if they
want to build things as well,
and then they learn to make
the place beautiful by using
artistic painting,
in particular,
to make the home domain they're
creating very beautiful.
And this brings up
the whole notion
of the educational
system we have
now, which I know
you unplugged from,
you said I'm not learning, this
is not teaching me what I need
to learn, and having it
integrate with what we chose
to become in our lives.
This is a radical reformation
that's needed in her.
>> AV: Absolutely --
>> RM: And as you say,
mentorship, apprenticeship --
>> AV: -- the more
I work with -- also,
using the hands by the
way, using hands to create.
Very important.
Been doing this for
a thousand years,
and now all of a sudden we
need to -- computer literate.
I mean, nothing
wrong, but what --
think of the loss of the craft
of the sensuality of work
and the connection you create
with your environment as you
take a piece of wood and you
start carving it or modifying
it to create a
chair or something.
It's a -- it's something that
we're really wired, you know,
the ability in order, right?
So they say it's really the
way to integrate a spiritual
experience which is the
experience of prayer or --
is labor, is using the --
>> RM: Labor -- yes.
>> AV: Using the
hands, using the hands.
We need to digest this.
I mean, this is all, like,
a thousand years or so
of spiritual evolution is
like, where has it gone,
it's not there anymore.
It's another loss because
we have, like, to go this,
and this, and you have to do --
>> RM: Let's talk about the
kind of boys that find their way
to you.
And is it usually
the parents who
are looking for you
to help their sons,
or are the sons somehow coming
to you through some other group
or mechanism, and are they often
disconnected and, you know,
basically playing video
games and doing the standards
things kids do now?
>> AV: Video games -- that's
how it started, this problem,
actually.
I did this massive
initiation, basically in 1997,
and it was this -- it
was a program after that,
I thought it was very
valuable and I learned a lot,
it allowed me to be with other
men, and it was beautiful work.
And then because maybe
somebody got turned on to me,
I remember my father or
something -- obviously,
the sons of my friend were
sitting Saturdays home,
playing computers, because they
don't go anywhere, you know,
the [INAUDIBLE] and I said well,
next Saturday come with me,
I'll take you surfing.
And that's how we started.
Take the kids surfing,
which is challenging.
>> RM: Were they resistant
to it or were they --
>> AV: Well, I wasn't their
father, so it was cool,
you know?
Surfing was the excuse for
them to show up on time,
ready to go.
>> RM: And they
willingly did this?
>> AV: Not willingly.
To do it willingly,
there are consequences.
>> RM: Right.
Okay.
>> AV: They had to
pay consequences.
And so they get it, there's no
negotiation, it's 8 o'clock,
it's 8 o'clock.
And if you're not there,
there are consequences.
It's not punishment,
consequences, right?
So they'd be there 8
o'clock and they're ready,
so we can go have fun,
instead of take care of the --
>> RM:
>> AV: And was there a
transformative moment for these
boys?
Did they end up saying hey, yes,
after the first time or so, did
they want to get up
and go or did they --
was it something you had
to really draw out of them?
>> AV: They'd never fell you.
>> RM: They're too cool.
>> AV: They're going
to learn to show up,
they're going to
learn how to surf,
they're going to learn to
have fun with other boys,
without killing anybody,
and have true fun.
So this is how it start,
and I start taking it up
in the mountains, and
wow, this is working.
And then became -- then
I discovered there was
a gentleman, his name is Brad
Leslie, is my mentor in Canada,
this guy started this young
men's adventure weekend,
it's another one
coming up on the 12th.
>> RM: What?
>> AV: Adventure weekend.
Coming up 12 of July.
And he brings, like,
hundreds of kids
at a time in the wilderness.
And there are hundreds
of men and hundreds
of kids, young men, and they
live together for a weekend.
It's an amazing place.
>> RM: I want to
talk about that.
What the process is like,
what they're like coming in,
is there prep for that?
And I also wanted
to ask you when
you connect with these boys and
they have a chance to really
come alive inside of themselves,
outside of the family
structure, outside of
the educational structure
and so forth, where they're
just there, as you say,
to work it out in these
weekends together.
Do you notice that they do --
already have an idea of what
their purpose is?
>> AV: Absolutely.
>> RM: Most of the time?
>> RM: Because you talk to most
adult men right now and they
have no idea what they're
here for or want to do.
It's like it gets squashed out.
But you're saying
if you preempt it,
if you catch it early and foster
it, they know this already?
>> AV: Yeah, this
is very important,
because I'm not a teacher,
I don't invent the wheel,
the wheel is already there.
My job is to find
a grammar so it can
be drawn out and recognized.
That is a skill.
And it's not something
you can learn in schools,
you know, you have
to be a little weird,
that's my qualification.
>> RM: Yeah, a
little weird, yeah.
>> AV: A little weird, weird
enough so you understand --
because they resonate with
your weirdness, really.
And because they're at a weird
time in their life, that's
the time they're
officially weird,
and I'm officially weird myself.
So there's a way we
can mirror each other.
I mentioned to
you the other time
we spoke when I
was a kid, when I
was a young boy, what happened
when I was in first grade.
>> RM: Yes, tell us about that
again, that was off camera.
>> AV: There was the teacher
took a liking to me in first
grade, and the other teacher --
the other mothers got jealous
and made it -- protested
with the head master,
and the head master
walked in the class,
sat down in front of me, and
went to find out if I'm really
that smart genius my
teacher thought I was.
This was the last time any woman
thought I was a smart genius --
[laughter] but --
>> RM: Jealous mothers, okay.
>> AV: So the teacher
ran me through some test,
and I aced them.
I don't remember if
[INAUDIBLE] and the head master
was very pleased with himself,
he had this grin on his face.
And when I seen that, I was
filled with a cold fury.
>> RM: Why?
>> AV: Well, it took me
fifty years to find out.
But it was a cold
fury, and it said --
the voice spoke inside me, and
said how dare you think that
this, knowing 1 plus
1 equals 2 defines me.
But I wasn't the
one thinking this,
it was a bigger thing
thinking this thing.
>> RM: Yeah, the
larger part of yourself
>> AV: Really, the
physical sense,
I remember now being
expanded inside.
So all our -- they call it
an education system is based
on this, right?
What happened to this rest
of the beautiful thing that
happens?
You know, as my friend
and coach says, 1 plus 1
is equals amazing.
And 1 plus 1 equals 2.
They're both -- you have to
be able to have them both
together.
So I had this vision, and
literally took me fifty years
to find out, because
we're in a world where
privilege is 1 plus 1.
If your privilege
is another thing,
you're going to be weird.
So it takes a long time to
really become comfortable with
this -- this is the first vision
six years old is a tough vision
to carry.
Also, you're not going
to talk to your mom,
because your mom is going
to say come on, go play
with your sister.
And rightly so,
because your mama
has to deal with the heroic
purpose of putting food
on the table, you know?
And it's other functions.
Where do you go
with this, I'm not
the only one with these
kinds of visions, right?
>> RM: But still
at six years old,
it was kind of defining where
your boundaries were at a very
early age and what
you were going to --
>> AV: Correct, when
I'm 18, I'm in college,
I look at the professor teaching
and he's a very smart guy,
very intelligent, very
articulate, brilliant.
But there's a voice
that comes inside me
and says the guy
doesn't know anywhere,
you've got to go somewhere else.
So you drop out of college,
I went to India and so forth.
>> RM: You went to
India for years,
you went on the
great journey, yeah.
>> AV: Right.
I went to the great journey.
But it takes -- and this
is really what I bring
to the plate.
I said let's look
for that thing.
I don't know how
it's going to happen,
I don't know how it's
going to come forth.
It might be doing a sweat
lodge -- might be while you --
might be while you climb
-- do something crazy,
maybe you create a poem,
maybe it will be --
I don't know where
it's going to happen.
But I'm going to create
opportunities for this
to come up.
>> RM: So when you do this,
obviously this is what you do,
you facilitate these
moments of awakening.
>> AV: Correct.
>> RM: And so you're seeing
by the age of 12, 13,
14 years old, they know,
they really know inside what
their purpose is or what they
want, what they want to do.
>> AV: They know there's
something bigger than that.
They don't know, they're
going against the current,
the current says it wants to
put you in these little boxes.
>> RM: I understand,
there's a mental disconnect.
>> AV: And they don't know
that this is possible,
there's a territory of vision
that is impossible and is
actually around you.
You swim in it all the time.
And that's why I use nature,
because nature is fantastic,
you can sit in front with
ceremonies in front of trees
and have incredibly revealing.
Because they get it.
I don't tell them
what's going to happen,
I don't, but they
get the message,
whatever needs to happen.
>> RM: When you're working
with boys you don't talk a lot,
there's not a lot of
information shared verbally,
it's all experiential, which is
as you say at that age you have
to reach out and
touch whatever it is.
>> AV: As Brad said,
they learn by doing,
they learn by being
treated by men,
we treat them like they're ten
years old and then they are.
>> RM: So they have
full responsibility?
>> AV: Full responsibility.
>> RM: How does that -- what
does that weekend look like
or that time together?
>> AV: Well, I've got to tell
you a little bit about it,
because it changes, depends
on the communities where you
produce it.
>> RM: That makes sense, sure.
>> AV: If I go to Canada,
it's going to be one weekend.
If I go to California it's
going to be another weekend.
If I do it here it's going
to be another weekend.
It depends on the
man with the brain,
because it's also
important to understand --
>> RM: Because they have
an imprint of their culture
on them, of course.
>> AV: Absolutely.
And then for us,
the men that are
going to work with me, it's
not about looking good,
it's not about the degrees,
it's not about the grief.
>> RM: Grief?
>> AV: Correct.
Because a person's initiation
is a person going down.
The beginning of the process
the person is going down.
And really, a way, the best
way for a man to hold his truth
and be honest is coming
up with his grief.
It's not about being
happy and successful.
>> RM: It's connecting with that
thing that breaks your heart.
>> AV: Correct,
that's what you bring,
that's going to make
you authentic and real.
Because boys, they
don't take bull.
They can smell you a mile away.
So I don't want people looking
good, I want people to be real.
If you're real, the
weekend is done, you know?
That is simple.
The people that work with
me and I work with them,
is that they require
me, absolutely, total --
>> RM: Authenticity.
>> AV: Authenticity.
Generally speaking, it's
a process of separation.
The rite of passage
is separation.
They come from this world,
they go into another world.
We're not, we're
down the rabbit hole.
It's a person going
down to his hurt.
So they come for intellectual
perception of reality,
we go into intelligence
perception of reality.
And we achieve that by
an experiential thing.
So I make an example.
Come off the bus, been
two hours in this bus,
and they're all rowdy and
full of spunk and things.
They're coming down
this trail, there's
a trail that goes down to
the lake, it's two miles.
It's two miles in the woods
and there's nobody there.
They're instructed to
go down in the woods.
So the first thing
they hear is a man
who is doing this grief song.
And no one ever heard a
grief song, but something
that curdle your blood.
And they don't know what
it is, but you know,
so they're going down
this magic forest,
but now it becomes blessed
because of the singing.
So they come down
and it's -- oh,
we're not in Kansas any more.
They have to proceed, right?
So -- and then other
things happen on this walk,
they encounter homeless people,
they're laying in the middle
of the stream and tell them
don't go there, don't go back,
they're crazy.
And another guy in a suit
and passes by, this is like,
focus on things, go back
to things that are crazy.
So this is really strange.
>> RM: So it's
very disorienting?
>> AV: Disorient -- that's
exactly what we want.
And then there's a gate.
So there are three men standing
in the middle of the road,
and these three men
are dressed in ashes.
And they're painted.
And so they come, they
come, so -- usually it's me.
So they line up in front,
they have to go past us.
So there's -- and ask them,
why are you here, individually.
Say why you are here, you
know, the answer is like oh,
because they try to figure
out what they want --
what I want to
hear, and I say, oh,
because I want to become a man.
Go back, so they don't come.
What do you mean go back.
Go back.
Next.
So everybody goes this
turn until they tell
me something that's honest.
I don't know why
I'm here, go, pass.
You know, and --
>> RM: No canned
answers are acceptable.
>> AV: So the other
thing is what they bring.
Well, oh, what?
What did you bring?
I don't know.
Go back.
Amazing.
Lasts 20 minutes, 50 people.
But it's the most
profound moment.
I know that when they walk
through this gateway they are
-- they want to be here.
>> RM: Yes, and then you have
a variety of experiences beyond
the gateway.
And one of them is
that you also --
you're very connected with the
animal kingdom and have a way
of intuitive connecting
with the animal kingdom.
And you have begun tracking,
taking people tracking so they
start --
>> AV: This is not the program,
this is something different we
do.
We do a little bit of a program
because there's no time.
Next thing they do
is elect the leaders.
That's another very
important moment,
because they circle
up and say we're
going to have to elect leaders,
and everybody's oh, me, me, me.
Okay, step in the circle.
What is there about you
that makes a leader?
And they go oh, umm, umm.
So they have to come up with
something which is honest.
So they're not in Kansas.
And everything, you know, is
like go forward, come back.
They're always people telling
totally disorienting thing,
do this, do that.
If not the right
answer they have
to come up with the own wisdom
in the thing, which is theirs,
later.
Nature is a big part.
Nature is a big
part of the event
because always happens
in nature because that's
the way it works.
But then I'll have
something else, which
is a walk about in Colorado,
which is about tracking elk
and then really enter in this
dimension of relationship
with animals and
what inspiration
you can get from the animals.
>> RM: And the
interconnectedness of all these
living beings in
your own place --
>> AV: Yeah, you're
not on the trail.
You walk, you walk the
trail the animal makes.
You walk when he walks, you're
still, still when he's still,
you understand, you know,
probably a mountain lion
has been following this track
too because he needs to eat.
So there's a mountain
lion, there's a --
>> RM: A mountain lion, right,
tracking the same animal along
side you.
>> AV: The squirrel, the
squirrel knows you're here,
it's going to make a noise.
How can you make
the squirrel not --
>> RM: So it doesn't start
chattering and alerting the elk
-- that you're -- so it's a
wonderful way to start really
seeing yourself in
a much larger web.
>> AV: You'll be amazed how
they fall in, like they've been
doing this all their lives.
It's amazing.
>> RM: We have to be
innately hungry for this.
We are part of nature, we've --
>> AV: They get it like
-- if they're kids.
You know, 12 to 17.
Adult, they're lost.
>> RM: I understand , too much
thinking has been bred out,
so to speak.
Let's talk about, for a
moment, after these boys return
from this experience,
and let's talk
about the interconnectedness
with the girls.
Because now they're coming
back and dealing with girls.
And you told me off camera about
one example of a young boy who
was dating a girl,
he really liked her,
but her family said
no, we don't like him,
we don't want him around.
Tell that story, because it
kind of shows where we are,
compared to what you're
trying to instill.
>> AV: This young man -- we
had a discussion that said --
so the parents told you that --
they didn't tell him not to see
her, they just made it
incredibly difficult.
And the guy, the man just
give up, said talk to the girl
said look, this is
too much for me.
And I'm going to have to
quit this relationship.
And I said, like, are you crazy?
You know, I didn't use the
expression are you crazy,
but really, I was real curious
to find out what it is.
And I told him to go
and I said did you ever
watch Romeo and Juliet?
You know, because
Juliet, you know,
Romeo risk his life in
order to be with Juliet.
Right?
And I'm Italian, so I know
those houses, you can't get in.
It's really difficult.
So he really -- go to -- he puts
his life on the line in order
to be with this woman.
And I think it would
be such a good example
for this young man.
So you see what happened, he
puts his life for the girl
does this crazy thing.
And Juliet has no
choice but to say yes.
Say yes, you know, gives
herself to this man
who is risking her
life to be with her.
And I think it's
a beautiful thing.
But what I'm really interested,
and really this young man
misses out is the second part
of this scene with Romeo.
Because Romeo, the first thing
that happens when he goes up,
meets the Capulets.
His enemies, mortal enemies.
And he calls his
enemies brothers.
Say, you don't know why
I'm calling you brother,
but you are in fact my brother.
So I won't raise
my hands on you.
So what happens is shifts the
centuries of conversation,
the town of Verona is
shifted immediately
by this one act of love.
It's shifted the whole
culture of the city.
There's, you know,
Capulets, Montagues.
They don't exist any more
because of this act of love.
So that's what I'm really
interested, I -- that --
that -- the guy gets
the girl is irrelevant.
What I was really relevant for
me, of course, very relevant
for the young man.
But what's really
important is the trying,
and the risk and the
totality of the act
really shifts the society.
The whole society.
It's a -- that's another
example for initiation.
That's truly an initiation.
Romeo doesn't come out of there
-- before he's a Montague.
He comes out of the
night of love with Juliet
he's transformed.
Total and other person.
He puts a service and
puts his new person
to the service of this world.
So that's what I was --
that's why it's important
for the ladies, for the girls
just to very conservative with
their --
>> RM: Let's talk about that.
Because about forty years ago
the sexual revolution occurred,
it created a totally different
dynamic between men and women,
certainly in the western world.
And in that, there
was no responsibility
to become engaged in an intimate
relationship with each other,
there was no consequence, it was
songs and movies depicted this.
It's like, get used to it,
get used to a one night stand
scenario.
That became common in the '70's.
And women had to kind of --
there was almost an emotional
panic in the psyche to figure
out how do we do this whole
thing now.
It changed so abruptly from
where people fell in love
and made a commitment
to each other.
And now it's just this is what
I'm supposed to do, I suppose.
So the women had to become
very self sufficient.
We're now seeing
this, and we're now
seeing these women often
divorced or not married
at all, their children and their
girls unhappy, and these girls,
their daughters are now
learning the same thing, which
is men won't be there
for you, you better
have it together and be able
to take care of yourself.
There's no more of this
interdependence, so to speak.
So what happened in your
eyes when women said --
bought into it and said okay, if
that's how we're supposed to do
it now.
>> AV: They really sold
this bill of goods.
Because again, there's a
process of that awakening.
And we think because we have
hormones, develop breasts,
that is about sexual.
Totally is a sexual
is part of it.
It's like intellect,
intelligence.
Same thing.
Sex is part of it, but
it's not the whole thing.
So I think as a
culture we don't have
room for the whole
thing, which is really
about awakening to love.
So that's what makes --
Juliet makes of Romeo,
makes him this hero
because she makes him a hero.
>> RM: And he's earning her love
with his own valor and courage
and commitment.
>> AV: Correct.
Absolutely.
But see, that's the dynamic.
You know?
You can't just hang out with
a guy because he's liking,
all day, so you want to
sleep with my daughter,
go steal ten horses.
>> RM: Right, whatever it takes.
>> AV: Whatever it takes.
>> RM: Bring something
to the table --
>> AV: Prove yourself.
It's not so much
about the horses,
but you going out and
going on an adventure
and getting support of your
cousins, and come up a man.
So this is a -- this is what we
say earlier, easy sex makes --
>> RM: Easy sex, yes.
>> AV: -- makes a boy the boys.
Only such a --
>> RM: The men don't grow up.
The men don't grow up
the same way, then.
>> AV: No, they don't.
No, why do you want to grow
up if you can get easy sex?
Why?
What forces you to manhood?
We do whatever -- if the lady
says climb the tree we're going
climb the tree.
If we're not to
have sex, we have
to be honorable, smart,
gallant, courageous.
That's what we will be.
>> RM: And the thing is,
even amidst all of this over
the last forty
years women, I mean,
they're so happy to have nooks
and kindles now because still,
girls and women are reading
these incredible romance novels
that go that way.
They don't want anyone to
know they're reading them,
of course.
Then you have, you know,
various versions of it,
like 50 Shades of Gray, which
has a lot of sub text to it.
So this whole notion of a
polarization between the sexes
remains alive and well
deep in the psyche,
even on the outside I
don't - if you're a woman,
I don't need him, I don't need
any boy, you know, I'll come,
choose as I want because
I take care of myself now.
It's a split in the psyche.
>> AV: Because it's really
the acknowledgement --
it's really the value in
the power of the feminine.
Total devaluation.
They sold this thing that you're
as good as you are pretty,
and put the skirts up.
They're so, old fashioned in
the magazine selling this crap
to them.
And it's really a
deeply devaluation
of the power of feminine.
Because they get in
touch with the sexuality.
It's got nothing to
do with feminine.
The power of feminine
is so much bigger.
I mean, there is definitely
-- what I do for --
I don't -- I'm a man, I'm not
qualified to do rite of passage
for women.
But I do this thing
with the fables.
Correct, you're talking
about psyche before.
And the psychic model we
really learn when we grow up,
in the early ages, when
the stories are being told.
And I'm using the -- for
the girls, Snow White.
>> RM: Snow White, yes.
>> AV: Because Snow White
is such a perfect fable
for nowadays.
Everything happens with the evil
step mother, or the evil mother
in the original version,
is really identified
with the way she looks.
>> RM: She is --
>> AV: Identified with
the mirror on the wall,
fairest of them all.
>> RM: That is
what's happening now.
>> AV: That is exactly
what is happening now.
Look what happens, because
her identification is
in the way she looks, she
creates these terrible deeds.
She kills --
>> RM: She kills the
innocence, she tries to kill
the innocence.
>> AV: She kills -- brilliant.
We should do this together.
>> RM: There you go, yes.
She kills the innocence.
>> AV: She's killing the
youth, and the feminine.
By the way, this
fable is really --
points to the fact that all
the days, even our culture,
we are very aware that
this transformation,
this passage between
14, you know,
the age is very important.
Look what happens.
Snow White, they either
get closed into towers,
guarded by Dragons, they
go into these adventures.
If the passage doesn't happen,
the whole town falls asleep.
That's how much the power of
the feminine is not manifested.
What happens is
the whole town --
>> RM: Falls asleep, waiting
for this to be awakened,
and waiting -- our
societies, we're out of time.
We could talk another few hours.
And it's true.
Our societies are waiting for
the feminine to come back.
Not to dominate, but to come
back and fully express itself.
And --
>> AV: And happening ritually.
It happens ritually.
And it can't -- it's not
a psychological problem,
it's a problem really to
awaken the power of gender.
It's the same thing that
happens with the boys, awaken
the power of gender.
There's no psychology.
There's no --
>> RM: Old fashioned coming of
age and facilitating it rather
than squashing it.
Thank you so much.
It's a wonderful conversation.
So I think this extended
out to a lot of hearts
that are watching right now.
>> AV: Thank you.
>> RM: Thank you, Andrea.
If your son is becoming
more socially disconnected
and fearful, perhaps some time
with Andrea and other kids
will bring him out of himself.
And we all have a part to
play in his development.
Hillary Clinton was
right about one thing,
it does take a village.
You can find Andrea through his
web site at livingthegift.org.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[Music_]